# Introduction

Welcome to the official documentation of ZfcRbac!

In this part, the following questions will be answered:

* Why should I use an authorization module?
* What is the Rbac model?
* How can I integrate ZfcRbac into my application?

## Why should I use an authorization module?

The authorization part of an application is an essential aspect to secure your application. While the authentication
part tells you who is using your website, the authorization answers if the given identity has the permission to
perform specific actions.

## What is the Rbac model?

Rbac stands for **role-based access control**. Zend Framework 2 offers a lightweight and very efficient implementation
of this authorization model.

The basic idea of Rbac is to use roles and permissions:

* **Users** can have one or many **Roles**
* **Roles** request access to **Permissions**
* **Permissions** are granted to **Roles**
* Roles can have children- and parent-roles
* Parent-roles inherit the children-roles Permissions

You can learn more about this in the [official Zend Framework 2 documentation](http://framework.zend.com/manual/2.2/en/modules/zend.permissions.rbac.intro.html).

## How can I integrate ZfcRbac into my application?

ZfcRbac offers multiple ways to protect your application:

* Using **Guards**: those classes act as "firewalls" that block access to routes and/or controllers. Guards are usually
  configured using PHP arrays, and are executed early in the MVC dispatch process. Typically this happens right after
  the route has been matched.
* Using **AuthorizationService**: an alternative method is to use the `AuthorizationService` and inject them into your
  service classes to protect them from unwanted access.

While it is advised to use both methods to make your application even more secure, this is completely optional and you
can choose either of them independently.

To find out about how you can easily make your existing application save, please refer to the following section

* [Cookbook: A real world example](/docs/07. Cookbook.md#a-real-world-application)
