# Quick Start

In this section, you will learn:

* How to setup the module
* How to specify an identity provider
* How to add simple role and permission providers

Before starting the quick start, make sure you have properly installed the module by following the instructions in
the README file.

## Specifying an identity provider

By default, ZfcRbac internally uses the `Zend\Authentication\AuthenticationService` to retrieve the user (logged or
not). Therefore, you must register this service in your application by adding those lines in your `module.config.php` file:

```php
return [
    'service_manager' => [
        'factories' => [
	        'Zend\Authentication\AuthenticationService' => function($sm) {
	            // Create your authentication service!
	        }
	    ]
    ]
];
```

ZfcRbac is flexible enough to use something else than the built-in `AuthenticationService`, by specifying custom
identity providers. For more information, refer [to this section](/docs/04. Role providers.md#identity-providers).

## Adding a guard

A guard allows to block access to routes and/or controllers using a simple syntax. For instance, this configuration
grants access to any route that begins with `admin` to the `admin` role only:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'guards' => [
	        'ZfcRbac\Guard\RouteGuard' => [
                'admin/*' => ['admin']
	        ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

ZfcRbac have several built-in guards, and you can also register your own guards. For more information, refer
[to this section](/docs/03. Guards.md#built-in-guards).

## Adding a role provider

RBAC model is based on roles. Therefore, for ZfcRbac to work properly, it must be aware of all the roles that are
used inside your application.

This configuration creates an "admin" role and a "member" role whose parent is "admin". In RBAC model terminology,
*admin* is the parent role of *member* role, while *child* is a child role of *admin* role. *admin* role inherits
all the permissions of *member* role.

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'role_providers' => [
	        'ZfcRbac\Role\InMemoryRoleProvider' => [
	            'admin',
		        'member' => 'admin'
	        ]
	    ]
    ]
];
```

ZfcRbac have several built-in role providers, and you can also register your own role providers. For more information,
refer [to this section](/docs/04. Role providers.md#built-in-role-providers).

## Adding a permission provider

As for roles, ZfcRbac must be aware of all the permissions that are used inside your application.

This configuration creates one permission "edit" that is granted to "member" role, and a permission "delete" that
is granted to "admin" role. Because of the inheritance of roles, "edit" permission is also granted to the "admin"
role (because "admin" is a parent of "member" role).

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'permission_providers' => [
	        'ZfcRbac\Permission\InMemoryPermissionProvider' => [
	            'edit'   => ['member'],
		        'delete' => ['admin']
	        ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

ZfcRbac have several built-in permission providers, and you can also register your own permission providers. For
more information, refer [to this section](/docs/05. Permission providers.md#built-in-permission-providers).

## Registering a strategy

When a guard blocks access to a route/controller, or if you throw the `ZfcRbac\Exception\UnauthorizedException`
exception in your service, ZfcRbac automatically performs some logic for you depending on the view strategy used.

For instance, if you want ZfcRbac to automatically redirect all unauthorized requests to the "login" route, add
the following code in the `onBootstrap` method of your `Module.php` class:

```php
public function onBootstrap(EventInterface $e)
{
    $t = $e->getTarget();
    
    $t->getEventManager()->attach(
        $t->getServiceManager()->get('ZfcRbac\View\Strategy\RedirectStrategy')
    );
}
```

By default, ZfcRbac redirects all unauthorized requests to a route named "login". This is, of course,
entirely configurable.

> For flexibility purpose, ZfcRbac **does not** register any strategy for you by default!

For more information about built-in strategies, refer [to this section](/docs/06. Strategies.md#built-in-strategies).

## Using the authorization service

Now that ZfcRbac is properly configured, you can inject the authorization service in any class and use it to check
if the current identity is granted to do something.

The authorization service is registered inside the service manager using the following key: `ZfcRbac\Service\AuthorizationService`.
Once injected, you can use it as follow:

```php
use ZfcRbac\Exception\UnauthorizedException;

public function delete()
{
    if (!$this->authorizationService->isGranted('delete')) {
        throw new UnauthorizedException();
    }

    // Delete the post
}
```

**Navigation**

* Continue to [the **Guards**](/docs/3. Guards.md)
* Back to [the Introduction](/docs/1. Introduction.md)
* Back to [the Index](/docs/Readme.md)