# Guards

In this section, you will learn:

* What are guards
* How to use and configure built-in guards
* How to create custom guards

## What are guards and when to use them?

Guards (called firewalls in older versions of ZfcRbac) are listeners that are registered on the `MvcEvent::EVENT_ROUTE`
event (in fact, you are not restricted to this event if you create your own guards). A guard is therefore therefore
executed before the request is dispatched to a controller, and allow to quickly and efficiently unauthorized access
to route and/or controllers.

Here is a simple workflow without guards:

INSERT DIAGRAM

And here is a simple workflow with route guards:

INSERT DIAGRAM

Guards are not really aware of permissions (it does not make any sense) but rather only think about "roles". For
instance, you may want to refuse access to each routes that begin by "admin/*" to all users that do not have the "admin" role.

Albeit simple to use, guards should not be the only protection in your application, and you should always also
protect your service. The reason is that your business logic should be handled by your service. Protecting a given
route or controller does not mean that the service cannot be access from elsewhere (another action for instance).

### Protection policy

Once one guard is added, ZfcRbac adopts a secure protection policy by default by refusing anything that is not
explicitely declared in a guard.

For instance, let's say you have two routes: "index" and "login". If you specify a route guard rule to allow "index"
route to "member" role, your "login" route will become defacto unauthorized to anyone, unless you add a new rule for
allowing the route "login" to "member" role.

This is the default behavior, and the most secure one. However, depending on your application architecture, this
protection can be quite frustrating. You can change it in ZfcRbac config, as follows:

```php
use ZfcRbac\Guard\GuardInterface;

return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'protection_policy' => GuardInterface::POLICY_ALLOW
    ]
];
```

Now, the "login" route will still be accessible to anyone, eventhough you have not explicitely defined a rule.

## Built-in guards

ZfcRbac comes with two guards: RouteGuard and ControllerGuard. All guards must be added in the `guards` subkey:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'guards' => [
            // Guards config here!
        ]
    ]
];
```

Because of the way Zend Framework 2 handles config, you can without problem define some rules in one module, and
more rules in another module. All the rules will be automatically merged.

> For your mental health, I recommend you to use either the route guard OR the controller guard, but not both. If
you decide to use both conjointely, I recommend you to set the protection policy to "allow" (otherwise, you will
need to define rules for every routes AND every controller, which can become quite frustrating!).

### RouteGuard

The RouteGuard allows to protect a route or a hierarchy of route. You must provide an array of "key" => "value",
where the key is a route pattern, and value an array of role names:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'guards' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Guard\RouteGuard' => [
                'admin/*' => ['admin'],
                'login'   => ['guest']
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

Those rules grant access to all admin routes to users that have the "admin" role, and grant access to the "login"
route to users that have the "guest" role (eg.: most likely unauthenticated users).

> The route pattern is not a regex. It only supports the wildcard (*) character, that replaces any segment.

You can also use the wildcard character for roles:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'guards' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Guard\RouteGuard' => [
                'home' => ['*']
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

This rule grants access to the "home" route to anyone.

> The RouteGuard listens to the `MvcEvent::EVENT_ROUTE` event with a priority of -10.

### ControllerGuard

The ControllerGuard allows to protect a controller. You must provide an array of array:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'guards' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Guard\ControllerGuard' => [
                [
                    'controller' => 'MyController',
                    'roles'      => ['guest', 'member']
                ]
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

Those rules grant access to each actions of the MyController controller to users that have either the "guest" or
"member" roles.

As for RouteGuard, you can use a wildcard (*) character for roles.

You can also specify optional actions, so that the rule only apply to one or several actions:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'guards' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Guard\ControllerGuard' => [
                [
                    'controller' => 'MyController',
                    'actions'    => ['read', 'edit'],
                    'roles'      => ['guest', 'member']
                ]
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

You can combine a generic rule and a specific action rule for the same controller, as follow:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'guards' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Guard\ControllerGuard' => [
                [
                    'controller' => 'PostController',
                    'roles'      => ['member']
                ],
                [
                    'controller' => 'PostController',
                    'actions'    => ['delete'],
                    'roles'      => ['admin']
                ]
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

Those rules grant access to each actions of the controller to users that have the "member" role, but restrict the
"delete" action to "admin" only.

> The ControllerGuard listens to the `MvcEvent::EVENT_ROUTE` event with a priority of -20.

## Creating custom guards

ZfcRbac is flexible enough to allow you to create custom guard. Let's say we want to create a guard that will
refuse access based on an IP addresses blacklist.

First create the guard:

```php
namespace Application\Guard;

use Zend\Http\Request as HttpRequest;
use Zend\Mvc\MvcEvent;
use ZfcRbac\Guard\AbstractGuard;

class IpGuard extends AbstractGuard
{
    const EVENT_PRIORITY = 100;

    /**
     * List of IPs to blacklist
     */
    protected $ipAddresses = [];

    /**
     * @param array $ipAddresses
     */
    public function __construct(array $ipAddresses)
    {
        $this->ipAddresses = $ipAddresses;
    }

    /**
     * @param  MvcEvent $event
     * @return bool
     */
    public function isGranted(MvcEvent $event)
    {
        $request = $event->getRequest();

        if (!$request instanceof HttpRequest) {
            return true;
        }

        if (isset($_SERVER['HTTP_X_FORWARDED_FOR'])) {
            $clientIp = $_SERVER['HTTP_X_FORWARDED_FOR'];
        } else {
            $clientIp = $_SERVER['REMOTE_ADDR'];
        }

        return !in_array($clientIp, $this->ipAddresses);
    }
}
```

> Guards must implement `ZfcRbac\Guard\GuardInterface`.

By default, guards are listening to the event `MvcEvent::ROUTE_GUARD` with a priority of -100. However, in this
case, we don't even need to wait for the route to be matched, so we overload the `EVENT_PRIORITY` constant to be
executed earlier.

The `isGranted` method simply retrieves the client IP address, and check it against the blacklist.

However, for this to work, we must register the newly created guard to the guard plugin manager. To do so, add the
following code in your config:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'guard_manager' => [
            'factories' => [
                'Application\Guard\IpGuard' => 'Application\Factory\IpGuardFactory'
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

The `guard_manager` config follows a conventional service manager config format.

Now, let's create the factory:

```php
namespace Application\Factory;

use Application\Guard\IpGuard;
use Zend\ServiceManager\FactoryInterface;
use Zend\ServiceManager\MutableCreationOptionsInterface;
use Zend\ServiceManager\ServiceLocatorInterface;

class IpGuardFactory implements FactoryInterface, MutableCreationOptionsInterface
{
    /**
     * @var array
     */
    protected $options;

    /**
     * {@inheritDoc}
     */
    public function setCreationOptions(array $options)
    {
        $this->options = $options;
    }

    /**
     * {@inheritDoc}
     */
    public function createService(ServiceLocatorInterface $serviceLocator)
    {
        return new IpGuard($this->options);
    }
}
```

The `MutableCreationOptionsInterface` was introduced in Zend Framework 2.2, and allows your factories to accept
options. In fact, in a real use case, you would likely fetched the blacklist from database.

Now, we just need to add the guard to the `guards` option, so that ZfcRbac execute the logic behind this guard. In
your config, add the following code:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'guards' => [
            'Application\Guard\IpGuard' => [
                '87.45.66.46',
                '65.87.35.43'
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

### Navigation

* Continue to [the **Role providers**](/docs/04. Role providers.md)
* Back to [the Quick Start](/docs/02. Quick Start.md)
* Back to [the Index](/docs/Readme.md)
