# Role providers

In this section, you will learn:

* What are role providers
* What are identity providers
* How to use and configure built-in providers
* How to create custom role providers

## What are role providers?

A role provider is an object that returns a list of roles to be added in the RBAC container. Each role provider must
implement the `ZfcRbac\Role\RoleProviderInterface` interface. The only required method is `getRoles`, and must return
either an array of string (for role names) eventually mapped to a parent role, or an array of
`Zend\Permissions\Rbac\RoleInterface` objects.

Roles can come from any sources: in memory, from a file, from a database...

### Using multiple providers

Internally, ZfcRbac using a role provider chain (`ZfcRbac\Role\RoleProviderChain`), so that you can specify multiple
role providers. ZfcRbac automatically aggregates roles from each role provider.

## Identity providers?

Identity providers are analogous to role providers in that they return the roles of the current user (logged or not).
ZfcRbac comes with a default identity provider (`ZfcRbac\Identity\AuthenticationIdentityProvider`) that uses the
`Zend\Authentication\AuthenticationService` service.

### Create your own identity provider

If you want to implement your own identity provider, create a new class that implements
`ZfcRbac\Identity\IdentityProviderInterface` class. Then, change the `identity_provider` option in ZfcRbac config,
as shown below:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'identity_provider' => 'MyCustomIdentityProvider'
    ]
];
```

The identity provider is automatically pulled from the service manager.

## Built-in role providers

ZfcRbac comes with two built-in role providers: `InMemoryRoleProvider` and `ObjectRepositoryRoleProvider`. All role
providers must be added to the `role_providers` subkey:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'role_providers' => [
            // Role providers config here!
        ]
    ]
];
```

> You don't need to specify the `guest_role`: it is automatically added for you!

### InMemoryRoleProvider

This provider is ideal for small/medium sites with very few roles. This role provider specifies roles directly in
your config, and hence does not need any database query.

Here is an example config that shows you all supported formats:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'role_providers' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Role\InMemoryRoleProvider' => [
                'admin', // with string
                'admin' => 'member', // with string and a parent role,
                new Role('anotherRole') // assuming Role implements RoleInterface
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

### ObjectRepositoryRoleProvider

This provider fetches roles from the database using `Doctrine\Common\Persistence\ObjectRepository` interface. This
role provider is intentionally simple and may be too simple depending on your use case.

You can configure this provider by giving an object repository service name that is fetched from the service manager:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'role_providers' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Role\ObjectRepositoryRoleProvider' => [
                'object_repository' => 'App\Repository\RoleRepository'
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

Or you can specify the `object_manager` and `class_name` options:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'role_providers' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Role\ObjectRepositoryRoleProvider' => [
                'object_manager' => 'doctrine.entitymanager.orm_default',
                'class_name'     => 'App\Entity\Role'
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

Please note that your entity fetched from the table MUST implement the `Zend\Permissions\Rbac\RoleInterface` interface.

#### Specifying a role name property

You may want to have a system where each user has its own role. As a consequence, the number of roles grows at the
same rate as the number of users, and loading each roles is going to kill your database. However, most of the time,
what the authorization system is interested in is actually the role(s) of the current identity only.

To that extent, `ObjectRepositoryRoleProvider` supports an optional option, called `role_name_property`, that define
the property's name of the role name. Most of the time, it will be simply `name`:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'role_providers' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Role\ObjectRepositoryRoleProvider' => [
                'object_repository'  => 'App\Repository\RoleRepository',
                'role_name_property' => 'name'
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

Now, instead of doing a `SELECT * FROM roles`, it will do a more optimized `SELECT * FROM roles WHERE roles.name IN('role1', 'role2')`

## Creating custom role providers

To create a custom role providers, you first need to create a class that implements the `ZfcRbac\Role\RoleProviderInterface`
interface.

Then, you need to add it to the role provider manager:

```php
return [
    'role_provider_manager' => [
        'factories' => [
            'Application\Role\CustomRoleProvider' => 'Application\Factory\CustomRoleProviderFactory'
        ]
    ]
];
```

You can now use it like any other role provider:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'role_providers' => [
            'Application\Role\CustomRoleProvider' => [
                // Options
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

A complete example is provided in [the **Cookbook**](/docs/06. Cookbook.md).

### Navigation

* Continue to [the **Strategies**](/docs/05. Strategies.md)
* Back to [the Guards](/docs/03. Guards.md)
* Back to [the Index](/docs/README.md)
