# Permission providers

In this section, you will learn:

* What are permission providers
* How to use and configure built-in providers
* How to create custom permission providers

## What are permission providers?

A permission provider is an object that returns a list of permissions to be added in the RBAC container. Each
permission provider must implement the `ZfcRbac\Permission\PermissionProviderInterface` interface. The only required
method is `getPermissions`, and must return either an array of string (for permission name) mapped to a list of roles
that have the permission, or an array of `Zend\Permissions\Rbac\PermissionInterface` objects.

Permissions can come from any sources: in memory, from a file, from a database...

### Using multiple providers

Internally, ZfcRbac using a permission provider chain (`ZfcRbac\Permission\PermissionProviderChain`), so that you can
specify multiple permission providers. ZfcRbac automatically aggregates permissions from each permission provider.

## Built-in permission providers

ZfcRbac comes with two built-in permission providers: `InMemoryPermissionProvider` and `ObjectRepositoryPermissionProvider`.
All permission providers must be added to the `permission_providers` subkey:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'permission_providers' => [
            // Permission providers config here!
        ]
    ]
];
```

### InMemoryPermissionProvider

This provider is ideal for small/medium sites with very few permissions. This permission provider specifies permissions
directly in your config, and hence does not need any database query.

Here is an example config that shows you all supported formats:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'permission_providers' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Permission\InMemoryPermissionProvider' => [
                'edit'  => ['member'],
                new Permission('delete', ['admin']) // assuming Permission implements PermissionInterface
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

### ObjectRepositoryPermissionProvider

This provider is ideal for small/medium sites with 10-100 permissions. The permissions are fetched from the database
using the `Doctrine\Common\Persistence\ObjectRepository` interface. Please note that this permission provider is intentionally simple
and always load the whole table. You cannot do any filtering (you should create your own provider for that).

> You can also add a cache, so that the query is only done once. For more information, refer to the "Optimize
for production" section.

You can configure this provider by giving an object repository service name that is fetched from the service manager:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'permission_providers' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Permission\ObjectRepositoryPermissionProvider' => [
                'object_repository' => 'App\Repository\PermissionRepository'
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

Or you can specify the `object_manager` and `class_name` options:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'permission_providers' => [
            'ZfcRbac\Permission\ObjectRepositoryPermissionProvider' => [
                'object_manager' => 'doctrine.entitymanager.orm_default',
                'class_name'     => 'App\Entity\Permission'
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

Please note that your entity fetched from the table MUST implement the `Zend\Permissions\Rbac\PermissionInterface` interface.


## Creating custom permission providers

To create a custom permission providers, you first need to create a class that implements the
`ZfcRbac\Permission\PermissionProviderInterface` interface.

Then, you need to add it to the permission provider manager:

```php
return [
    'permission_provider_manager' => [
        'factories' => [
            'Application\Permission\CustomPermissionProvider' => 'Application\Factory\CustomPermissionProviderFactory'
        ]
    ]
];
```

You can now use it like any other permission provider:

```php
return [
    'zfc_rbac' => [
        'permission_providers' => [
            'Application\Permission\CustomPermissionProvider' => [
                // Options
            ]
        ]
    ]
];
```

A complete example is provided in the cookbook.
